"Previous Section"_Section_tools.html - "SPARTA WWW Site"_dws -
"SPARTA Documentation"_dd - "SPARTA Commands"_dc - "Next
Section"_Section_python.html :c

:link(dws,http://dsmc.sandia.gov)
:link(dd,Manual.html)
:link(dc,Section_commands.html#comm)

:line

10. Modifying & extending SPARTA :h3

SPARTA is designed in a modular fashion so as to be easy to modify and
extend with new functionality.  In fact, about 75% of its source code
is files added in this fashion.

In this section, changes and additions users can make are listed along
with minimal instructions.  If you add a new feature to SPARTA and
think it will be of interest to general users, we encourage you to
submit it to the developers for inclusion in the released version of
SPARTA.  Information about how to do this is provided
"below"_#mod_14.

The best way to add a new feature is to find a similar feature in
SPARTA and look at the corresponding source and header files to figure
out what it does.  You will need some knowledge of C++ to be able to
understand the hi-level structure of SPARTA and its class
organization, but functions (class methods) that do actual
computations are written in vanilla C-style code and operate on simple
C-style data structures (vectors and arrays).

Most of the new features described in this section require you to
write a new C++ derived class (except for exceptions described below,
where you can make small edits to existing files).  Creating a new
class requires 2 files, a source code file (*.cpp) and a header file
(*.h).  The derived class must provide certain methods to work as a
new option.  Depending on how different your new feature is compared
to existing features, you can either derive from the base class
itself, or from a derived class that already exists.  Enabling SPARTA
to invoke the new class is as simple as putting the two source
files in the src dir and re-building SPARTA.

The advantage of C++ and its object-orientation is that all the code
and variables needed to define the new feature are in the 2 files you
write, and thus shouldn't make the rest of SPARTA more complex or
cause side-effect bugs.

Here is a concrete example.  Suppose you write 2 files pair_foo.cpp
and pair_foo.h that define a new class PairFoo that computes pairwise
potentials described in the classic 1997 "paper"_#Foo by Foo, et al.
If you wish to invoke those potentials in a SPARTA input script with a
command like

pair_style foo 0.1 3.5 :pre

then your pair_foo.h file should be structured as follows:

#ifdef PAIR_CLASS
PairStyle(foo,PairFoo)
#else
...
(class definition for PairFoo)
...
#endif :pre

where "foo" is the style keyword in the pair_style command, and
PairFoo is the class name defined in your pair_foo.cpp and pair_foo.h
files.

When you re-build SPARTA, your new pairwise potential becomes part of
the executable and can be invoked with a pair_style command like the
example above.  Arguments like 0.1 and 3.5 can be defined and
processed by your new class.

As illustrated by this pairwise example, many kinds of options are
referred to in the SPARTA documentation as the "style" of a particular
command.

The instructions below give the header file for the base class that
these styles are derived from.  Public variables in that file are ones
used and set by the derived classes which are also used by the base
class.  Sometimes they are also used by the rest of SPARTA.  Virtual
functions in the base class header file which are set = 0 are ones you
must define in your new derived class to give it the functionality
SPARTA expects.  Virtual functions that are not set to 0 are functions
you can optionally define.

Additionally, new output options can be added directly to the
thermo.cpp, dump_custom.cpp, and variable.cpp files as explained
below.

:line

Here are additional guidelines for modifying SPARTA and adding new
functionality:

Think about whether what you want to do would be better as a pre- or
post-processing step.  Many computations are more easily and more
quickly done that way. :ulb,l

Don't do anything within the timestepping of a run that isn't
parallel.  E.g. don't accumulate a bunch of data on a single processor
and analyze it.  You run the risk of seriously degrading the parallel
efficiency. :l

If your new feature reads arguments or writes output, make sure you
follow the unit conventions discussed by the "units"_units.html
command. :l

If you add something you think is truly useful and doesn't impact
SPARTA performance when it isn't used, send an email to the
"developers"_http://dsmc.sandia.gov/authors.html.  We might be
interested in adding it to the SPARTA distribution.  See further
details on this at the bottom of this page.  :l,ule

:line

Here are the subsequent topics discussed below, most of which are new
features that can be added in the manner just described:

10.14 "Submitting new features for inclusion in SPARTA"_#mod_14 :all(b)

:line
:line

10.14 Submitting new features for inclusion in SPARTA :link(mod_14),h4

We encourage users to submit new features that they add to SPARTA to
"the developers"_http://dsmc.sandia.gov/authors.html, especially if
you think the features will be of interest to other users.  If they
are broadly useful we may add them as core files to SPARTA or as part
of a "standard package"_Section_start.html#start_3.  Else we will add
them as a user-contributed package or file.  Examples of user packages
are in src sub-directories that start with USER.  The USER-MISC
package is simply a collection of (mostly) unrelated single files,
which is the simplest way to have your contribution quickly added to
the SPARTA distribution.  You can see a list of the both standard and
user packages by typing "make package" in the SPARTA src directory.

With user packages and files, all we are really providing (aside from
the fame and fortune that accompanies having your name in the source
code and on the "Authors page"_http://dsmc.sandia.gov/authors.html
of the "SPARTA WWW site"_dws), is a means for you to distribute your
SPARTA to the SPARTA user community and a mechanism for others to easily
try out your new feature.  This may help you find bugs or make contact
with new collaborators.  Note that you're also implicitly agreeing to
support your code which means answer questions, fix bugs, and maintain
it if SPARTA changes.

The previous sections of this doc page describe how to add new
features of various kinds to SPARTA.  Packages are simply collections
of one or more new class files which are invoked as a new "style"
within a SPARTA input script.  If designed correctly, these additions
do not require changes to the main core of SPARTA; they are simply
add-on files.  If you think your new feature requires non-trivial
changes in core SPARTA files, you'll need to "communicate with the
developers"_http://dsmc.sandia.gov/authors.html, since we may or may
not want to make those changes.  An example of a trivial change is
making a parent-class method "virtual" when you derive a new child
class from it.

Here is what you need to do to submit a user package or single file
for our consideration.  Following these steps will save time for both
you and us.  See existing package files for examples.

All source files you provide must compile with the most current
version of SPARTA. :ulb,l

If your contribution is a single file (actually a *.cpp and *.h file)
it can most rapidly be added to the USER-MISC directory.  Send us the
one-line entry to add to the USER-MISC/README file in that dir, along
with the 2 source files.  You can do this multiple times if you wish
to contribute several individual features.  :l

If your contribution is several related featues, it is probably best
to make it a user package directory with a name like USER-FOO.  In
addition to your new files, the directory should contain a README, and
Install.csh file.  The README text file should contain your name and
contact information and a brief description of what your new package
does.  The Install.csh file enables SPARTA to include and exclude your
package.  See other README and Install.sh files in other USER
directories as examples.  Send us a tarball of this USER-FOO
directory. :l

Your new source files need to have the SPARTA copyright, GPL notice,
and your name at the top, like other SPARTA source files.  They need
to create a class that is inside the SPARTA namespace.  Other than
that, your files can do whatever is necessary to implement the new
features.  They don't have to be written in the same stylistic format
and syntax as other SPARTA files, though that would be nice. :l

Finally, you must also send a documentation file for each new command
or style you are adding to SPARTA.  This will be one file for a
single-file feature.  For a package, it might be several files.  These
are simple text files which we will convert to HTML.  They must be in
the same format as other *.txt files in the lammps/doc directory for
similar commands and styles.  The "Restrictions" section of the doc
page should indicate that your command is only available if SPARTA is
built with the appropriate USER-MISC or USER-FOO package.  See other
user package doc files for an example of how to do this.  The txt2html
tool we use to do the conversion can be downloaded from "this
site"_http://www.sandia.gov/~sjplimp/download.html, so you can perform
the HTML conversion yourself to proofread your doc page.  :l,ule

Note that the more clear and self-explanatory you make your doc and
README files, the more likely it is that users will try out your new
feature.
